 
  Unlike spoken language which consists of acoustic sound patterns, sign language uses  manual communication to convey meaning. This essay examines main components of sign  language grammar and features of the language that are related to the spatial medium.  Furthermore, it points out similarities between spoken languages and signed languages and  discusses why spoken languages are more commonly used.  Throughout this essay I refer to Penny Boyes Braem’s ideas which she states in the first and  third chapter of her book.  
  Sign language includes several means of expression which are divided into two main  categories. Manual means include the signer’s hands and arms as well as the four  parameters of sign articulation: hand location (that is place of articulation), hand movement,  handshape and hand orientation. Non-manual markers such as the signer’s mouth and head  or facial expressions can express feelings and are of fundamental importance when it comes  to grammar. (Boyes Braem 1990, p. 18)  
  While words consist of consonants and vowels; signs are expressed through hands. The  meaning of a sign can be changed by modifying one of the manual components. This  resembles spoken language as a change of a single phoneme changes a word’s or even an  utterance’s meaning. Minimal pairs in both spoken and signed language are created when  the structure of two words differs in only one aspect. (Boyes Braem 1990, p. 24)  
  A condition of linguistic codes is that they consist of a limited number of elements. Even  though humans can produce many sounds, spoken languages only refer to a limited number.  The same applies to the use of gestures in signed languages.  
  Both languages follow certain linguistic rules and have restrictions when combining language  components. In spoken language, restrictions on possible combinations of sounds are called  ‘phonotactic constraints’. (Mihalicek & Wilson 2011, p.103)  
  There are also invalid combinations of hand shapes in some sign languages. However,  certain rules seem to apply equally to all sign languages. The ‘rule of symmetry’ states that  both hands need to be shaped in the same way when moving simultaneously. The ‘rule of  dominance’ states that if both hands are shaped differently, the dominant hand is allowed to  move while the other hand is not. (Boyes Braem 1990, p. 27 f.)  
  Furthermore, hand shapes can vary among features like ‘narrow’, ‘wide or ‘bent’ which are  comparable to distinctive features of phonology in spoken language.  
  Further similarities are the occurrence of accent and the use of certain linguistic forms and  functions such as the indication of time. Both languages share aspects of morphology; the  flexion of words serves as an example. (Boyes Braem 1990, p. 21+29)  
  When it comes to differences between the languages, sign languages do not use articles or  copulas. The main difference is the manner in which their fundamental elements, phones and  primes, are combined into utterances. (Boyes Braem 1990, p.45)  
  The production of words in spoken language is faster than it is in signed language, which is  explained by the physical fact that signs are produced in a larger area than speech.  However, it takes about the same amount of time to transmit a proposition. While spoken  language follows a specific linear sentence structure, sign language enables the production  and perception of many signs at the same time. The so called ‘spatial medium’ allows a  signer to transmit several pieces of information simultaneously. Sign language is perceived  through our visual sense; humans can process more elements at a time if they are received  by the eyes rather than by the ears.  
  Concerning the spatial medium, signs are produced within a specific signing space. A  gesture that is closer located to the signer’s body and performed lower than usual indicates  whispering. If a gesture leaves the signing area and is performed outside of it, it indicates  shouting. To some extent, the spatial medium implies the volume of an utterance. In ASL,  verb forms are expressed through a change of movement parameters within the spatial  medium. They are derived from the sign of their matching noun. (Boyes Braem 1990, p.46 f.)  
  If one bears in mind the above mentioned information on both types of languages, the  question of why spoken languages are more commonly used is raised. A fundamental  reason is the fact that humans developed a highly complex speech apparatus which gives us  the anatomic capability to produce speech. In contrast to sign language, spoken language  does not rely on eye contact. It is possible to communicate in the dark, on the phone and  basically in any other situation of everyday life. The same does not apply to signed  languages. Feelings, character traits such as humor or speech melody are easier expressed  through spoken language.  
  This essay demonstrated similarities between both languages especially in regard to  grammar. However, there are numerous arguments why spoken languages are used more  frequently than signed languages.  <bib>  References  Boyes Braem, Penny. 1990. Einführung in die Gebärdensprache und ihre Erforschung.  Hamburg: Signum.  Mihalicek, Vedrana & Christin Wilson (eds.). 2011. Language files: Materials for an  introduction to language and linguistics. Ohio State University Press 11th edn. 